How this file came about.....

    My friend Gilbert Saint-flour was a genius MVS programmer,
who spent a long time studying the internals of MVS, through the
year 2011, when he tragically passed away at the young age of 61.
Among other things Gilbert did, he produced the file of free
programs--CBT File 183.

    Gilbert had his own business, together with 6 or 7 other
people, and he owned a P390 machine, which they bought at full
price, from IBM.  Gilbert produced both free tools for the public
to use, and "pay tools" which he licensed to customers.  His
principal business was to convert large installations from VSE to
MVS, which he ran, together with his partners.

    Gilbert was the author of the SHOWMVS program, which later
came to be called SHOWzOS, and which is now maintained by my dear
friend Roland Schiradin.  SHOWzOS displays MANY MANY internal
facts and quantities connected with your MVS (z/OS) system.  One
of the things displayed is a lot of information about the DASD
(disk packs) which are attached to the system.  Gilbert wanted to
get this display from the REAL UCB's (Unit Control Blocks), and
he also wanted to get that information NON APF-AUTHORIZED.  The
UCB's contain the information that Gilbert wanted to display.

    It seems that in earlier versions of MVS, that the macro
UCBSCAN (which got the UCB information) would run un-authorized,
but in later versions, especially in ESA and in z/OS, IBM forced
the normal UCB scans, run by problem programs, to get only a COPY
of the UCB information, rather than the REAL UCB's.  In order to
get the REAL UCB's, your program had to be APF-authorized.

    For the purposes of SHOWMVS, Gilbert was unsatisfied with this
state of affairs, and he looked for a way to get the REAL UCB's
using an un-authorized program.

    At that time, most system programmers and developers were not
allowed (by IBM) to call up IBM developers and talk to them.  IBM
simply did not allow it.  All of us systems programmers had that
problem.  (Nowadays, if we sign a non-disclosure agreement with
IBM, they allow us to talk to their developers, but in former
times, it was difficult.)

    We therefore had a trick.  If we wanted to talk to an IBM
developer and ask a QUESTION, we would rephrase the question as a
PROBLEM, and then escalate the PROBLEM to "Level 2", where
developers would address the issue.  That was our way to access
the developers.  Otherwise, we couldn't talk to them.

    Gilbert told me that he did this a bunch of times, and in that
way, he discovered the ULUT (UCB Lookup Table), whose whereabouts
IBM hid, because they changed its location several times, and they
didn't want customers to use it as a programming interface.  You
can access the ULUT, which points to all the UCB's (the REAL ones)
on the system, without being APF-authorized.  This is the method
that Gilbert uses in SHOWzOS.

    After Gilbert passed away, I didn't want people to forget the
wonderful work that Gilbert did.  As a way to memorialize him, I
wrote a program called UCBDASD, which displays all the disk
devices on the system, and which uses Gilbert's method of
accessing their UCB's.  UCBDASD gets the REAL UCB's, and displays
a lot of the information within them.

    Much later, I discovered that since the UCBDASD program gives
access to the REAL UCB's, then if you zap one of these UCB's to
change its properties (you have to be authorized to change a UCB).
I saw that the change is permanent (till the next IPL, when the
VATLSTxx parmlib member is reestablished), and with a few slight
changes, the UCBDASD program could be adjusted so that it would
be able to change the (PRIVATE, PUBLIC, or STORAGE) properties of
the online disk packs.  We now have a (TSO command) way of doing
this without having to issuc a console MOUNT command.  Cool.  You
might need it in a pinch.

    So that explains the origin of this file.  It was created to
perpetuate Gilbert's memory.  Good luck in using it.

    All the best of everything to all of you.....

Sincerely,   Sam Golob      sbgolob@cbttape.org    (Mar 18, 2024)


